# Refactor As Of 08/14/2024

## Introduction

This document covers the various recent changes to Phlint App. Due to the many
adjustments in logic to authentication that was necessary to get both JWT and
OAuth2 authentication working together, this document was written to cover in
detail how authentication currently works in Phlint App. Should you have any
questions or concerns, please reach out to Phlint App's
[maintainer](https://github.com/tomit4).

### Authentication Changes

Integration of both Email/JWT and Google OAuth2 authentication strategies proved
somewhat difficult due to the use of both
[Python Social Auth](https://python-social-auth.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)
and
[Simple JWT](https://django-rest-framework-simplejwt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
This documentation in part is an attempt to exemplify an (admittedly somewhat
hacky) series of workarounds to get both to work together.

**settings.py**

The settings.py configuration file had many changes, and a few fields, although
they remain unchanged, played a key role in understanding how Django handles
custom authentication strategies. Simple JWT is meant to work with Django in a
more automated fashion. However, because we are integrating it in conjunction
with Python Social Auth, using Simple JWT requires us to forego some of these
niceties and dig a bit more under the hood.

Firstly, all JWT's require a secret key, thusly you'll see the field within
settings.py as:

```py
# SECURITY WARNING: keep the secret key used in production secret!
SECRET_KEY = "secret"
```

Note that the hash you see in our actual `settings.py` file will need to be
placed in the `backend/.env` file instead, and a corresponding empty field must
also be provided in `backend/env-local` in the near future.

Next we have the subtle changes to the `REST_FRAMEWORK` settings:

```py
# Django Rest Framework Settings
REST_FRAMEWORK = {
    "DEFAULT_AUTHENTICATION_CLASSES": [
        "users.auth.CookieTokenAuthentication",
        "rest_framework.authentication.BasicAuthentication",
        "rest_framework.authentication.SessionAuthentication",
        "rest_framework.authentication.TokenAuthentication",
        "rest_framework_simplejwt.authentication.JWTAuthentication",
    ],
    "DEFAULT_PERMISSIONS_CLASSES": [
        "rest_framework.permissions.isAuthenticated",
    ],
}

AUTHENTICATION_BACKENDS = [
    "django.contrib.auth.backends.ModelBackend",
    "social_core.backends.google.GoogleOAuth2",
]
```

Note the placement of `users.auth.CookieTokenAuthentication` at the top of our
`"DEFAULT_AUTHENTICATION_CLASSES"` list. This is our custom authentication
strategy, and placing at the top of this list is more a precautionary measure to
ensure it is utilized for authentication <em>first</em>.

Our custom authentication strategy lives in the `users/auth.py` file, and we'll
be covering the changes to that file soon. Note that in experimenting with the
ordering of these classes, I discovered that `SessionAuthentication` is the
class which holds the authentication strategy responsible for verifying the
`csrf` token. Also note that at the end of this list, we provide the
`rest_framework_simplejwt.authentication.JWTAuthentication` authentication
strategy from Simple JWT. Ultimately I believe that these strategies are
possibly NEVER implemented due to the custom `CookieTokenAuthentication`
strategy overriding all other strategies. This is important because:

```py
# Setting Time for Simple JWTs
SIMPLE_JWT = {
    #! For testing only
    "ACCESS_TOKEN_LIFETIME": timedelta(minutes=10),
    "REFRESH_TOKEN_LIFETIME": timedelta(minutes=10),
}
```

These settings may indeed not be read by our JWTs as they stand right now. I did
not test them. Note that I changed the times as part of my testing of the
application, and they'll need to be reduced to 1 min in the near future to test
them.

At this point, I feel it prudent to mention that <b><em>we have not implemented
refresh token logic yet for either email/JWT nor Google OAuth2
strategies</em></b>. Once other aspects of the authentication life cycle are set
up, we will address the refresh token logic.

**/users/auth.py**

Note that this section is NOT referring to the `/users/routes/auth.py`, but
rather to the file by the same name in the `/users/` directory. This file is of
significance to the Django ecosystem, as when referred to within the
`settings.py`'s `"DEFAULT_AUTHENTICATION_CLASSES"` field, it overrides other
authentication methods, and runs whenever an HTTP POST request is made that
includes the `credentials: 'include'` header.

```py
from rest_framework.authentication import BaseAuthentication
from rest_framework.exceptions import AuthenticationFailed
from rest_framework_simplejwt.tokens import AccessToken, RefreshToken
from users.models import User
from users.utils.auth_utils import *


class CookieTokenAuthentication(BaseAuthentication):
    # TODO: Add more logic regarding refresh_token
    def authenticate(self, request):
        access_token = request.COOKIES.get("access_token")
        #  refresh_token = request.COOKIES.get("refresh_token")
        if not access_token:
            return None

        try:
            if access_token.count(".") == 2:
                payload = AccessToken(access_token).payload
                user_id = payload.get("user_id")
                user = self.get_user(user_id)
                if user:
                    return (user, access_token)
            else:
                return None
        except Exception as e:
            logger.error("Authentication error: %s", str(e))
            raise AuthenticationFailed("Invalid token")

    def get_user(self, user_id):
        try:
            return User.objects.get(pk=user_id)
        except Exception as e:
            logger.error("Error getting User by id: %s", str(e))
            return None
```

Custom authentication methods in Django require that a custom authentication
strategy class have two methods: `authenticate()` and `get_user()`. Note that
should the `authenticate()` method return `None`, the request will return with
the `user` field being an instance of `AnonymousUser`. This fact will be of
importance later on when we inspect the conditional checks in our
`authentication_test()` route handler.

So what's happening in our custom authentication strategy? Well after pulling in
various imports required for our strategy, we declare the
`CookieTokenAuthentication` class, which extends the `BaseAuthentication`
strategy from the `rest_framework.authentication` library. We then declare our
`authenticate()` method, which takes an instance of `self` and `request`. Note
that this `request` is indeed the same HTTP request that is passed through any
of our route handlers whenever an HTTP POST with the "credentials: 'include'"
header.

Moving on, we then grab the request's cookies, specifically grabbing the
`access_token`. If there is no `access_token` cookie in the headers, then we
simply return `None` (i.e. `request.user` is an instance of `AnonymousUser`).

If there is an `access_token` cookie, we then check for the presence of two "."
characters within the `access_token` cookie string. This is a distinguishing
feature that differentiates a JWT from a Google OAuth2 `access_token`.
Essentially this if statement is asking, "is it a JWT?", and then, if it is, we
continue.

The SimpleJWT library then extracts the payload from the JWT using the
`AccessToken()` method. Should this fail (i.e. the JWT is invalid/expired), an
exception is thrown and the try block falls into the exception block. Should the
payload be present, the `user_id` is extracted from the payload. That `user_id`
is then passed to the `get_user()` method.

The `get_user()` method is relatively straight forward, it simply takes the
`user_id` parameter and queries the `users.user` table via the `User` model, and
returns the `User` object found there (and throws an exception if the user isn't
found). This then returns us back up the call stack to the `authenticate()`
method.

Back in the `authenticate()` method, the User object returned from `get_user()`
method is stored in a variable called `user` and as long as that user exists
(i.e. is not None), then we return a tuple containing both the `user` and the
`access_token`.

The `else` block is indicative of the token in the `access_token` cookie not
having two "." characters, and it is assumed it is either invalid or a Google
OAuth2 token. Either way, we simply return `None`.

At this point, you might be wondering, "why not include GoogleOAuth2 logic here
as well?".

That's a good question and I did make attempts at putting this logic in the
`else` clause, but in order to use GoogleOAuth2 logic, we need to bring in the
`@psa` macro which gives us access to the `request.backend.do_auth()` method.

Placing this macro within this class caused the program to crash, as the `@psa`
macro appears to be meant to be utilized only within route handlers, and not
within custom authentication strategies. Thusly the `request.backend.do_auth()`
method (which is a strategy in and of itself) is utilized directly within our
`authentication_test()` route handler and also within the
`register_by_access_token()` and `login_by_access_token()` route handlers.

Note that we have access to the `request.backend.do_auth()` method because each
of these route handlers include the `@psa` macro.

**/users/routes/auth.py:**

Many changes were made to `/users/routes/auth.py` to make Email/SimpleJWT and
GoogleOAuth2 strategies work. Right now the Signing Up Process works for both
Email and GoogleOAuth2 (but Login still only works for GoogleOAuth2).

Small changes were made to the `register_by_access_token()` method, which signs
up the user using GoogleOAuth2, as well as `login_by_access_token()` method,
which logs the user in using GoogleOAuth2. Really the only thing of note is that
the use of the `rest_framework.authtoken.models import Token` was removed as it
proved unnecessary and introduced bugs (the use of `Token` methods were
technically meant to be a SessionAuthentication strategy)

I removed all use of `Token`, and it specifically is no longer passed as the
`access_token` to the authentication cookies in both
`register_by_access_token()` and `login_by_access_token()` route handlers. These
fields were changed from:

```py
res = set_authentication_cookies(res, token.key, refresh_token, request)
```

to:

```py
res = set_authentication_cookies(res, access_token, refresh_token, request)
```

Moving on, the meat of our authentication logic occurs in a series of
conditional checks within the `authentication_test()` method, which is currently
written as:

```py
@api_view(["POST"])
@csrf_protect
@psa()
def authentication_test(request, backend) -> Response:
    try:
        access_token = request.COOKIES.get("access_token")
        if isinstance(request.user, User):
            AccessToken(access_token)
            return Response(
                {
                    "message": "Authorized: User successfully authenticated using Email/JWT Auth"
                },
                status=status.HTTP_200_OK,
            )
        elif request.backend.do_auth(access_token):
            user = request.backend.do_auth(access_token)
            if user:
                return Response(
                    {
                        "message": "Authorized: User successfully authenticated using Google OAuth"
                    },
                    status=status.HTTP_200_OK,
                )
        elif isinstance(request.user, AnonymousUser):
            logger.warning("User Attempted To Login As AnonymousUser")
            return Response(
                {"message": "Unauthorized: Anonymous User Login Detected"},
                status=status.HTTP_401_UNAUTHORIZED,
            )
        else:
            logger.warning(
                "User %s failed all other authentiction checks", request.user
            )
            return Response(
                {
                    "message": "Unauthorized: User failed all other authentication checks"
                },
                status=status.HTTP_401_UNAUTHORIZED,
            )
    except Exception as e:
        logger.error("%s Uncaught Exception Error:", str(e))
        return Response(
            {"message": str(e)}, status=status.HTTP_500_INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR
        )
```

There is a decent amount going on here, and some magic is still happening under
the hood, so let's dive in a bit.

Recall that this route is hit whenever on the frontend our
`<AuthContextProvider.tsx>` component (see frontend/contexts) is wrapped around
any of our client side Route components (see frontend/router/index.tsx). This
context provider component immediately makes a POST request to our backend's
`authentication_test()` route handler when the component is first mounted (via
the `useEffect` hook), and passes within the `fetch` call's headers the
`access_token`, the `refresh_token`, the `session_token`, and the `csrf` token.
The relevant frontend HTTP request looks like this:

```ts
const testRes = await fetch(urls.BACKEND_TEST_ROUTE, {
  method: "POST",
  headers: {
    Accept: "application/json",
    "Content-Type": "application/json",
    "X-CSRFToken": csrfToken,
  },
  credentials: "include",
});
```

Upon the request hitting the backend, because the `credetials: 'include'` header
is present, the custom `CookieTokenAuthentication` strategy is invoked. This
checks if the `access_token` is present, and is a valid JWT. If it is, it
returns the tuple with the `user` and the `access_token`, but how do we access
it from within the `authentication_test()` method?

Both our custom `CookieTokenAuthentication` and GoogleOAuth2 strategies adjust
the `request.user` variable, but return two different types of data within it.

As covered earlier, the `CookieTokenAuthentication` will only ever return two
different types of data, that of `User` or `AnonymousUser` and store it in the
`request.user` field. By contrast to our `CookieTokenAuthentication` strategy,
the GoogleOAuth2 strategy will store in the `request.user` field a string,
containing the user's Google ID instead.

Due to the difference between storing an instance of `User` vs a `string` in
`request.user` (again, Email/JWT stores `User` in `request.user`, and
GoogleOAuth2 stores a `string` in `request.user`.), we can utilize this
different return type to determine whether the user initially signed up with
Google or with Email. Let's walk through the strategy line by line.

Firstly, let's assume the user signed up by email and was issued a JWT. First,
the `CookieTokenAuthentication` strategy runs prior to the
`authentication_test()` route handler runs. In this happy path scenario, the JWT
is valid and returns our User from the database. Then within our
`authentication_test()` route, this first check occurs after once again grabbing
the `access_token` cookie from the request.

```py
access_token = request.COOKIES.get("access_token")
if isinstance(request.user, User):
    AccessToken(access_token)
    return Response(
        {
            "message": "Authorized: User successfully authenticated using Email/JWT Auth"
        },
        status=status.HTTP_200_OK,
    )
```

Again, the `CookieTokenAuthentication` <em>will make the request.user an
instanceof User by NOT returning None</em>. We can then once again, check the
AccessToken to ensure it is valid, and if it is valid, we return a 200_OK
response! The user is validated as their `access_token` is a valid JWT!

Let's move onto what happens if the initial `CookieTokenAuthentication` strategy
fails. Barring an exception being thrown, the `CookieTokenAuthentication`
strategy will either not see an `access_token` cookie and return `None` OR it
will see that the `access_token` string doens't have two "." characters in it,
and return `None`. In both cases this return of `None` sets the `request.user`
field to an instanceof `AnonymousUser`.

<em>However</em>, this could <em>still</em> mean we signed up with GoogleOAuth2.
How can we determine that? Well now we're in the land of using Python Social
Auth now. Thusly we need the `@psa` macro.

This is a separate strategy written by the author's of Python Social Auth
running under the hood. Should Python Social Auth's authentication strategy
return as authenticated, the `@psa` macro will then invoke logic to populate the
request.user field with the Google User's Google ID, (i.e. a string that is the
name they signed up to google with).

The `@psa` macro also appends the `backend.do_auth()` method to the request
dictionary, which we can then use to "magically" authenticate the user via the
access_token. Thusly, the next conditional within our `authentication_test()`
route handler looks like this:

```py
elif request.backend.do_auth(access_token):
    return Response(
        {
            "message": "Authorized: User successfully authenticated using Google OAuth2"
        },
        status=status.HTTP_200_OK,
    )
```

This simple `elif` check does the "magic" work provided by Python Social Auth.
This essentially reaches out to Google and checks the `access_token` to see if
it is still valid. If it is still valid, then Django/Python Social Auth reaches
into the `auth_user` table and retrieves the user in some way (the exact
strategy I have not yet investigated). Here we simply check of the `do_auth`
method returns anything at all (i.e. not None). If it does, then we can assume
two things:

1. That the `access_token` successfully authenticated using Google OAuth2.
2. That the user exists within our `auth_user` table.

So what happens next? What happens if both these previous `if` and `elif`
conditions fail?

Well in this situation, both JWT and GoogleOAuth2 strategies have failed, with
the `access_token` not being valid to either authentication strategies.

Only one other condition is truly known to me at the time of this writing, but
of course, there are defensive checks and exceptions thrown should edge cases
arise during this check. The next conditional looks like this:

```py
elif isinstance(request.user, AnonymousUser):
    logger.warning("User Attempted To Login As AnonymousUser")
    return Response(
        {"message": "Unauthorized: Anonymous User Login Detected"},
        status=status.HTTP_401_UNAUTHORIZED,
    )
```

So let's go down the line again. The JWT failed, the return value from our
`CookieTokenAuthentication` strategy is `None`, which means the `request.user`
is `None` and the request.user would be `AnonymousUser`.

There is a caveat to this, which is that the `@psa` macro would have changed the
`request.user` to a string if the user signed up with Google Oauth2, but if they
didn't, then their strategy would have failed as well, returning, once again,
`None`, and setting the `request.user` to `AnonymousUser`.

The first check:

```py
if isinstance(request.user, User):
```

Fails because the request.user returned None from our
`CookieTokenAuthentication` strategy.

The second check:

```py
elif request.backend.do_auth(access_token):
```

Fails because the `request.backend.do_auth()` returns None.

The third check:

```py
elif isinstance(request.user, AnonymousUser):
```

Succeeds because the previous two attempts to verify the user being an instance
of User using two different authentication strategies have both failed, leaving
the `request.user` being an instance of `AnonymousUser`.

In this situation we simply log a warning to our custom logger that somehow an
instance of `AnonymousUser` passed through our gates and we simply return a 401
UNAUTHORIZED status back to the user. This logic on the frontend's
`<AuthContextProvider>` then throws the `if (!res.ok)` clause, setting an error
message visible to the user. The client side router (react-router) then
redirects the user back to the home landing page after a short delay period of 3
seconds.

I won't go over the other clauses too much except to post them here, they
essentially are just defensive measures in case something truly unexpected
happens:

```py
    else:
        logger.warning(
            "User %s failed all other authentiction checks", request.user
        )
        return Response(
            {
                "message": "Unauthorized: User failed all other authentication checks"
            },
            status=status.HTTP_401_UNAUTHORIZED,
        )
except Exception as e:
    logger.error("%s Uncaught Exception Error:", str(e))
    return Response(
        {"message": str(e)}, status=status.HTTP_500_INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR
    )
```

This is the main chunk of the work done. However, some small changes were also
made to other methods to conform to this new authentication logic. One of them
exists within the `logout()` route handler:

```py
@api_view(["POST"])
@permission_classes([AllowAny])
def logout_view(request, backend) -> Response:
    try:
        response = Response(
            {"message": "User logged out successfully"},
            status=status.HTTP_200_OK,
        )
        remove_authentication_cookies(response)
        logout(request)
        return response
    except Exception as e:
        logger.error("Logout error: %s", str(e))
        return Response({"error": str(e)}, status=status.HTTP_500_INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR)
```

This route handler might need a refactor along with others as the
`@permission_classes[]` macro is something I'm not currently familiar with, but
the previous `@permission_classes[isAuthenticated]` macro threw errors, and runs
methods which, at the time of this writing, I am unfamiliar with.

Additionally I removed use of the `rest_framework.authtoken.models import Token`
as mentioned earlier, which this method utilized to invalidate the Token. This
is no longer needed.

Very simply, the cookies are removed and the user is logged out using Django's
native `logout()` method. This should be sufficient to log the user out as of
right now, but if should anyone believe this method to be insufficient for any
reason please let me know.

## Conclusion

There were additional changes to the way the Gallery is rendered, as the S3
logic for establishing and working with the user's Albums utilizes and interacts
with the `request.user` field. That said, the logic required only a simple
`if/elif` check, and is relatively trivial by comparison to this update to
authentication.

I also made a small check to the frontend's `<Onboarding.tsx>` component, in
which the `token` hash is checked immediately upon load of the component via a
`useEffect` hook. If the `token` is not present, or has expired in the redis
cache, then the user is shown a short error message and is NOT shown the
onboarding form. After a 3 second delay, the user is then redirected back to the
home page.

Again, if you have any questions or concerns, please reach out to me via Discord
or other means. This authentication strategy still probably needs some fine
tuning and another refactor, so having more eyes on it would be helpful.
