# Getting Set Up in For Phlint With Amazon S3 via IAM Console

## Introduction

Phlint App stores its images as blob objects within [Amazon S3 Buckets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_S3). Once you have joined the Phlint App Team, you'll be granted access to our development S3
Bucket server from the [Project Lead](https://github/tomit4). There's no need to sign up for Amazon AWS
yourself to work with the team at the Phlint App (although familiarity with
Amazon AWS basics is helpful).

## Signing Into AWS IAM Console

When you first join the Phlint App Team, you'll be provided with a
credentials.txt file that has various credential fields in this style format:

```
IAM_USER_NAME: phlint-johnd
IAM_PASSWORD: 12345*7
AWS_I3_CONSOLE_URL: https://123456789012.signin.aws.amazon.com/console
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=UfP0l80hM3DdpSzOk2Uht
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=Yw7SCTLlUxQPZzx4Cg_j2
```

Once the Project Lead has contacted you and provided you with the appropriate
credentials, you'll first need to sign into the Amazon S3 IAM console. The
`AWS_I3_CONSOLE_URL` field in the credentials sent to you will hold the URL
you'll need to visit, it should look something like this:

```
https://123456789012.signin.aws.amazon.com/console
```

The digits at the beginning of the URL are the Account ID, and when entered like
this into your URL search bar, the Amazon AWS IAM Login page will autofill the Account ID field with this
number.

The `IAM_USER_NAME` field will hold your user name for your access to the Phlint
App's S3 Bucket. Enter it in the form field `IAM user name`.

The `IAM_PASSWORD` field will hold your <em>temporary</em> password generated by
AWS for your initial sign in.

Click on the "Sign In" button. You will now be prompted to change your password be re-entering the
temporary password and then typing out your new password twice. Please establish
a new password and store it securely.

## Navigating to S3 Buckets

AWS holds a vast number of services, most of which you will not be using for
Phlint App. If you are unfamiliar with Amazon's Web Console that you are
presented with when first logging in, don't pay it much mind. In the Search Bar
at the Top of the Page, simply type in "S3" and click on the first result under
the "Services" field.

You'll notice a simple menu page. Under the "General purpose buckets" field,
you'll find a list of the buckets, of which there should only be one we will
be using at the time of this writing for development, the
`phlint-app-s3-test` bucket. Click on it to see the varioues files and
directories that are currently held in the S3 bucket for development. You won't
really be interacting with this menu much except to ensure that uploads and
deletions of files/directories are being executed correctly when testing out the
Phlint App.

## Providing AWS .env Credentials

Additionally within the env-sample file, you'll notice two fields:

```.env
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=
```

Provided in your email with your credentials you'll notice two of the same
fields provided to you. These are hash strings that need to be provided when
working within your development environment so that you can programatically
interact with AWS S3 via the boto SDK.

As mentioned in the [Initial Setup](https://github.com/cafeDeDevs/phlint_app/blob/main/docs/initial_setup.md) and the [Contributing](https://github.com/cafeDeDevs/phlint_app/blob/main/docs/contributing.md) documentation, the `env-sample` file needs to be copied over as `.env`. In this case the
backend will require the `.env` file to have these credentials filled out in
order to interact with the AWS S3 bucket. Make sure that you fill these two
fields out in the `.env` file prior to attempting to test out the S3
functionality of the Phlint App.

## A Word On Discretion

The Project Lead has volunteered his own AWS account to be used for the Phlint
App. Please be respectful and discreet. Do <em>not</em> hand out your AWS
credentials to any one else and use your best judgement when securing your
passwords and sensitive information like the `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and the `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`.

While the Project Lead has ensured that all developers have limited access to
the AWS account, and can only use the functionality of the S3 buckets, potential
for abuse does exist. When in doubt, contact the Project Lead before attempting
anything other than basic testing of the applicaiton's uploading, downloading,
deleting, and creation capabilities.

## When Things Go Wrong

Should you forget your password, lose your credentials, or you simply want to
change some settings in your AWS IAM Console, contact the Project Lead and let
them know. Most problems that arise when using AWS S3 can be resolved relatively
easily and quickly should something go wrong. The most important thing is that
you reach out to your Project Lead as soon as possible!

Thank you for contributing to Phlint App!
